<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <style>
        p.ex1 
        {
        margin-left: 30%;
        margin-right: 30%;
        }
        h4.ex1
        {
        margin-left: 30%;
        margin-right: 30%;
        }
        blockquote.ex1
        {
        margin-left: 35%;
        margin-right: 35%;
        }
</style>
 <style type="text/css">
 p.topright
 {
   position:absolute;
   top:0;
   right:0;
  }
  p.topleft
 {
   position:absolute;
   top:0;
   left:0;
  }
   p.bottomright
 {
   position:fixed;
   bottom:0;
   right:0;
  }
</style>
        <title>Mahler as Editor</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <h4 class="ex1">Chapter II: Mahler’s Revisions</h4>
        <p class="topleft"><a href="Chapter2_2.xhtml" target="_self">Next Page ---></a></p>
        <p class="topright"><a href="index.xhtml" target="_self"> <--- Previous Page</a></p>
        <p class="ex1">
            <u>Methodology, Overview</u>
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            The following chapters, condensed to a single chapter for the purposes of this application, explore Mahler’s specific revisions to <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> in depth. The first examines the large-scale architectural alterations (mostly cuts), while the second focuses on localized, minute changes (both cuts and additions). My survey of the <i>Bärenhäuter</i> cuts began with the vocal scores and the conductor’s scores (one volume per act).<a id="t20" href="#fn20"><sup>20</sup> </a><a id="t21" href="#fn21"><sup>21</sup></a>  I compared the edits found there to a sampling of orchestral parts, where I paid particular attention to the first four desks of first violins, the first desk of second violins, the first desk of cellos, and the first bassoon. The cuts marked in the scores do not always match up with the parts. Either there was some uncertainty about exactly where the cuts would be, or they moved at some point between Mahler’s score study and the orchestra’s rehearsals. In cases of discrepancy, I have generally given priority to the parts. Several have timings written in, though their accuracy is open to debate since the total duration (two hours and fifty-seven minutes, according to one player) exceeds that of the more modern recording by over half an hour.<a id="t22" href="#fn22"><sup>22</sup></a> Regardless, the parts provide insight into the revision history.  For example, the orchestra must have rehearsed the overture, as it is marked as lasting twelve minutes, though it was not included in the production in the end. By examining these materials, I aim to show how editing was a creative process for Mahler and reflective of his dramaturgical sense.
        </p>
        <br/>
        <br/>
        <hr/>
        <p class="ex1" id="fn20">
            <a href="#t20"><sup>20</sup></a> <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> vocal score, 1899, OA.2544, Österreichische Nationalbibliothek Musiksammlung, Vienna, Austria.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="fn21">
            <a href="#t21"><sup>21</sup></a> <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> orchestral scores, 1899, OA.1328, Österreichische Nationalbibliothek Musiksammlung, Vienna, Austria.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="fn22">
            <a href="#t22"><sup>22</sup></a> Siegfried Wagner. <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> (<i>The Man in a Bear’s Skin</i>). Thüringian Symphony Orchestra. Konrad Bach. Marco Polo 8.223713-14, 1994, 2 CDs.
        </p>
    </body>
</html>