<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <meta charset="utf-8"/>
        <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1"/>
        <style>
        p.ex1 
        {
        margin-left: 30%;
        margin-right: 30%;
        }
        h2.ex1
        {
        margin-left: 30%;
        margin-right: 30%;
        }
        h1.ex1
        {
        margin-left: 30%;
        margin-right: 30%;
        }
        h4.ex1
        {
        margin-left: 30%;
        margin-right: 30%;
        }
        blockquote.ex1
        {
        margin-left: 35%;
        margin-right: 35%;
        }
</style>
 <style type="text/css">
 p.topright
 {
   position:absolute;
   top:0;
   right:135px;
  }
   p.bottomright
 {
   position:fixed;
   bottom:0;
   right:135px;
  }
</style>
        <title>Mahler as Editor</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <h1 class="ex1">Mahler as Editor</h1>
        <p class="topright"><a href="Chapter2_1.html" target="_self">Next Page --></a></p>
        <h2 class="ex1">The 1899 Vienna Hofoper Version of Siegfried Wagner’s Der Bärenhäuter</h2>
        <h4 class="ex1">Cheston Humphries</h4>
        <h4 class="ex1">Advisor: Dr. Joy Calico</h4>
        <h4 class="ex1">Vanderbilt University</h4>
        
        <br/>
        <br/>
        <br/>
        <h4 class="ex1"><b>Abstract</b></h4>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            This study uses primary sources from the Austrian National Library Archive in Vienna to reconstruct Gustav Mahler’s performance of Siegfried Wagner’s opera <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> at the Hofoper in 1899, and argues that Mahler’s extensive revisions to the score shed light on his aesthetic sensibilities as well as his dramaturgical perspective as an opera conductor.  I encoded score examples in MEI and rendered them using Verovio, so that the reader can interact with the score and view the selected excerpt at any point in its revision history. The thesis is a work in progress, and the version presented here is abridged for the purposes of this graduate school application.
        </p>
        <br/>
        <br/>
        <br/>
        <h4 class="ex1">Chapter I: Introduction and Background</h4>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            On 22 January 1899, the opera <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> (<i>The Man in a Bear’s Skin</i>) received its premiere at the Königliches Hof- und Nationaltheater München. Its composer was the only son of Richard Wagner, Siegfried. Siegfried Wagner (1869-1930) studied music beginning in 1889 with his father’s notable student, Engelbert Humperdinck, but decided to begin pursuing a career in architecture, studying in Berlin and Karlsruhe. While on a trip to Asia in 1892, Wagner reversed course and chose to take up music professionally, sketching a symphonic poem during the course of the trip, which was ultimately premiered in the summer of 1895. From 1896 he began conducting in earnest, becoming an associate conductor at Bayreuth (there his conducting of the Ring Cycle earned him praise from Gustav Mahler). It is in the operatic genre that Siegfried, like his father, produced the majority of his compositions, writing some 18 over the course of his life. The first of these was <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i>, Wagner’s Op. 1.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            The opera’s genesis can be dated to 1895, when Humperdinck’s aborted plan to compose an opera on the Brothers Grimm stories “Der Bärenhäuter” and “Des Teufels rußiger Bruder” came to Siegfried’s attention via his sister, who had recently met the older composer. Working from Wilhelm Hertz’s Spielmannsbuch and the two Grimm stories, Siegfried began writing the opera in 1896, on a libretto he had prepared himself from the existing stories, starting with the overture, as he had apparently already conceived many of <i>Bärenhäuter</i>’s themes.  The full score was completed on 6 June 1898, the composer’s 29th birthday. Max Brockhaus in Leipzig acquired the rights to publish the work. The January 1899 Munich premiere was, by some accounts, a great success, and several opera houses later staged the work.<a id="text1" href="#footnote1"><sup>1</sup></a>
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            The opera, set just after the 30 Years War, concerns Hans Kraft, a soldier who becomes employed by the devil to stoke the flames in Hell. After losing some of the devil’s souls in a dice game with the Stranger, Hans is cursed to wander the earth with bad hygiene and a bottomless sack of gold unless a woman stays faithful to him for three years. He returns to his hometown and discovers that the mayor (who has three daughters) is in debt with the innkeeper. Hans pays the debt in full and the mayor promises one of his daughters to him. Two of the daughters mock him but Luise pledges to be faithful and takes his ring. Three years pass and the devil releases Hans and gives him three wishes. The Stranger advises Hans to liberate Plassenburg from the Wallensteins, which he does, and finds Luise who has indeed remained faithful. 
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            The 1899 Viennese production at the Hofoper under Gustav Mahler is the focus of this thesis. Mahler (1860-1911) took over the directorship of the Hofoper in 1897, and began instituting sweeping reforms in an attempt to restore glory to an institution in decline, plagued by lazy musicians and general complacency. Mahler was by his own admission naturally averse to cuts in the works of both the symphonic and operatic repertoires — he gave the first uncut Viennese performances of several of Richard Wagner’s operas, including the complete Ring Cycle and <i>Die Meistersinger</i> — but was unafraid to modify a score where he thought it warranted. His willingness to rework the score applied equally to canonical composers as well as young newcomers to the scene.  Mahler famously made some <i>retuschen</i> (retouchings) to the symphonies of Beethoven and Schumann (of which much has already been written), and made such sweeping cuts in Bruckner’s Fourth Symphony as to dramatically alter the nature of the music.<a id="text2" href="#footnote2"><sup>2</sup></a> <a id="text3" href="#footnote3"><sup>3</sup></a>
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            Mahler was even unafraid to arrange pieces of chamber music (such as Beethoven’s Op. 95 quartet) for orchestra. About this project, Mahler told the critic Eduard Hanslick:
        </p>
        <blockquote class="ex1">
            Chamber music by definition is intended for performance in a domestic setting. It is really only enjoyed by the performers. Once it is transferred to the concert hall, the intimacy is lost; but more still is lost: in a large space the four parts are weakened and do not reach the listener with the strength intended by the composer. I give them this strength by reinforcing each part. Don’t we do the same in the orchestral movements of Haydn and in the Mozart overtures? Does this alter the character of those works? Certainly not. The sound volume of a work must be adapted to the dimensions of the hall in which it is to be given. In a small theatre I would give the <i>Nibelungen</i> with a reduced orchestra, just as in an enormous theatre I would reinforce it.<a id="text4" href="#footnote4"><sup>4</sup></a>
        </blockquote>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            This nineteenth-century notion of authentic performance practice seems somewhat alien in today’s HIP-inflected performance scene, in which most would sooner reduce rather than increase the number of players in Haydn or Mozart. Nevertheless, this quotation is a valuable insight into Mahler’s conceptualization of the role of the conductor or performer as an intermediary between the composer and the audience, whose job is to convey the character of a piece of music, not to deliver the score exactly as printed in every circumstance. In order to heighten the impact of a piece and maintain a certain abstract integrity to the original, Mahler would make modifications. Mahler is demonstrating what Lydia Goehr would call an “open-concept” of the work, a notion that has roots in Nietszche and Wittgenstein's writings.<a id="text5" href="#footnote5"><sup>5</sup></a> Mahler goes further than merely adapting the forces for a particular space, however; he told Natalie Bauer-Lechner that “…[Beethoven’s late Quartets] simply <u>demand</u> a string orchestra” (emphasis Mahler’s).<a id="text6" href="#footnote6"><sup>6</sup></a> Incidentally, Mahler’s Beethoven arrangement also dates to 1899, the same year as the Viennese premiere of <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i>.   
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            Mahler’s first hearing of the complete opera was in Munich during its original run. He stopped off to hear it on his return to Vienna after conducting a performance of his <i>Symphony No. 2</i> in Liège, Belgium on 22 January 1899. The performance of <i>Bärenhäuter</i> he heard would have occurred on 23 January 1899, the second-ever performance.<a id="text7" href="#footnote7"><sup>7</sup></a> Mahler would likely have known of Siegfried by this time. His mother, Cosima Wagner, had been busy promoting his work, and Siegfried had previously been a guest conductor at the Vienna Philharmonic. On 19 February 1899, Mahler would have his second brush with the work. He stood in for Richard Strauss at a <i>Novitäten Konzert</i> (a new music concert) organized by the Society of Authors, Composers, and Music Publishers (an early protector of musical intellectual property), conducting two preludes from Strauss’s opera <i>Guntram</i>. The program opened with the overture to <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> under the composer’s baton. According to Austrian composer Wilhelm Kienzl's diary, Cosima and her daughters were present in the hall, and the audience gave Wagner’s overture an enthusiastic reception.<a id="text8" href="#footnote8"><sup>8</sup></a>
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            When it came time to stage <i>Bärenhäuter</i> at the Hofoper Mahler took issue with said overture, as he seems to have decided to exclude it late in the rehearsal process. There is evidence it was meant for performance until relatively late in the process as both the orchestral and vocal scores bear Mahler’s characteristic blue markings for rehearsal numbers and cues, and the orchestral parts even include timings for the overture. The same parts have “<i>weg</i>” penciled in at the top of the page, however, marking it for deletion (although no such markings appear in the scores.<a id="text9" href="#footnote9"><sup>9</sup></a> Mahler’s opinion of the work as a whole was not very favorable:
        </p>
        <blockquote class="ex1">
            the quality of the work was insufficient to interest the intelligentsia; neither was it likely to appeal to the general public, who were impressed by Mascagni and Leoncavallo… The 	first act is so superior to the others that it hardly seemed to have been written by the same man. The melodies have no sooner begun than they are over, but the opera as a whole had a certain charm and an incontestable gracefulness that might be due to the fact that Siegfried was born on Sunday, a lucky omen.<a id="text10" href="#footnote10"><sup>10</sup></a>
        </blockquote>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            Siegfried’s supposed luck seems to have brought the opera some success, as it received 17 more performances in Vienna in 1899, but productions of the opera elsewhere were markedly less successful. Mahler himself and several critics, including Eduard Hanslick and Ludwig Karpath, seemed to think Mahler’s judicious cuts and unfailing devotion to any music he was tasked with performing were responsible for the success.<a id="text11" href="#footnote11"><sup>11</sup></a> Karpath even went so far as to advocate for additional cuts beyond Mahler’s. The public seems to have cooled considerably by the following year; on 18 March 1900, the <i>Deutsche Zeitung</i> used <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> as proof that Mahler was staging inferior works at the Hofoper.<a id="text12" href="#footnote12"><sup>12</sup></a>
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            Thanks to detailed notes kept by the players inside the covers of the parts, it is possible to speak with precision about the orchestral rehearsal schedule for the Viennese production of the opera.<a id="text13" href="#footnote13"><sup>13</sup></a> According to a second violinist, there were twelve rehearsals for the players, beginning on 27 February, exactly a month before the opening performance. Mahler led this rehearsal, which lasted 2 hours (from 10 AM to noon, according to our violinist). There were two subsequent “Correcturproben” before the first of two Sitzproben on 2 March (the second followed the next day). The first Ensembleprobe occurred on 13 March, and five more took place between that date and the last rehearsal, a “Generalprobe,” on 23 March.<a id="text14" href="#footnote14"><sup>14</sup></a> In a bit of political maneuvering, Mahler tried to get Hans Richter to conduct the premiere. The outgoing director of the Vienna Philharmonic and conductor of many of Richard Wagner’s Viennese premieres, Richter was soon to depart Vienna for the Hallé Concert Society in Manchester (for which Mahler would be blamed), and he was Siegfried’s godfather. This did not come to pass, and Mahler took flak for depriving Richter of the opportunity of “guiding Richard Wagner’s son’s first steps in the theatre.”<a id="text15" href="#footnote15"><sup>15</sup></a>
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            On 28 February, Mahler sent a telegraph to Siegfried, asking him to come to Vienna no later than 4 March and run the rehearsals for four days while Mahler was away.<a id="text16" href="#footnote16"><sup>16</sup></a> Siegfried arrived in Vienna on 3 March, and was promptly whisked away to a rehearsal (which must have been the second sitzprobe). He was not the only Bayreuth representative present during the preparations of <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i>, for the producer Julius Kniese had been dispatched as well to help with the production. Cosima, while not in Vienna, stayed abreast of the rehearsals through letters written to her by her son. In a 12 March letter to Prince Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg, Cosima relayed tidings of Siegfried’s experience in the rehearsals and declared:
        </p>
        <blockquote class="ex1">
            The director, Mahler, was very helpful and has done all in his power to rehearse and produce the work, but has decided, for some mysterious reason — or perhaps one which it is only too easy to explain — to make some quite incomprehensible cuts; for example, all of Luisel’s prayer, which must be considered the very heart of the work, as well as all other parts where there is an atmosphere of ‘communion’: In front of everyone, my son asked him calmly: ‘Is it all the religious part which you dislike?’ But showing great composure, he has managed to get the most important passage replaced… [on the opinion of an author of book she is reading] the author explains that what distinguishes the Semites from the Germans is that the latter have a strong penchant for religion, which the Semites lack completely….<a id="t17" href="#fn17"><sup>17</sup></a>
        </blockquote>
        <p class="ex1" style="text-indent: 4%">
            Despite Cosima’s coarse, characteristic antisemitism, she was invested in maintaining positive relations with Mahler if only because he could further her son’s career, while Mahler did his best to not burn bridges with Bayreuth. He would later send singers to be trained there, including Anna von Mildenburg, who was dispatched to prepare for the legendary 1903 Mahler/Roller <i>Tristan und Isolde</i>. Mahler and Siegfried himself seem to have had a more genuinely cordial relationship, as Mahler invited him back to conduct a December 1899 performance of <i>Bärenhäuter</i> as a benefit concert, though this was complicated by issues with the opera administration, to both Mahler and Siegfried’s chagrin. It ultimately took place on 11 December 1899 under Wagner’s baton, as noted in a violin part.<a id="t18" href="#fn18"><sup>18</sup></a> Siegfried retained Mahler’s changes for this performance, though whether this was an act of diplomacy or an acceptance of Mahler’s criticism is unclear.<a id="t19" href="#fn19"><sup>19</sup></a>
        </p>
        <br/>
        <br/>
        <hr/>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote1">
            <a href="#text1"><sup>1</sup></a> Siegfried Wagner, <i>Der Bärenhäuter: opera in 3 acts, op. 1 no. 69B</i> (Munich, Musikproduktion Höflich, 2018).
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote2">
            <a href="#text2"><sup>2</sup></a> David Pickett, “Gustav Mahler as an Interpreter: A Study of His Textural Alterations and Performance Practice in the Symphonic Repertoire.” PhD diss., University of Surrey, 1988.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote3"><a href="#text3"><sup>3</sup></a> Benjamin Korstvedt, <i>Mahler’s Bruckner: between devotion and misprision</i>, Journal of the American Musicological Society Vol. 70, No. 2 (2017): 357-432.         
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote4">
            <a href="#text4"><sup>4</sup></a> Henry-Louis de la Grange, <i>Gustav Mahler: Vienna: The Years of Challenge (1897-1904)</i> (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1995), 136.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote5">
            <a href="#text5"><sup>5</sup></a> Lydia Goehr, <i>Imaginary Museum of Musical Works: An Essay in the Philosophy of Music</i> (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1992), 90-93.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote6">
            <a href="#text6"><sup>6</sup></a> La Grange, Mahler: the years of challenge (1897-1904), 136.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote7">
            <a href="#text7"><sup>7</sup></a> Ibid., 143.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote8"> 
            <a href="#text8"><sup>8</sup></a> Bert van der Waal van Dijk, “Gustav Mahler — 1899 Concert Vienna 19-02-1899,” Mahler Foundation Archive, accessed 23 November 2019. <a href="https://mahlerfoundation.info/index.php/plaatsen/139-austria/vienna/2283-concert-vienna-20" target="_blank"> https://mahlerfoundation.info/index.php/plaatsen/139-austria/vienna/2283-concert-vienna-20.</a>
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote9">
            <a href="#text9"><sup>9</sup></a> Handwritten notes in the <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> orchestral parts, 1899, OA.448, Österreichische Nationalbibliothek Musiksammlung, Vienna, Austria, 1.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote10">
            <a href="#text10"><sup>10</sup></a>  La Grange, <i>Mahler: the years of challenge (1897-1904)</i>, 157.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote11">
        <a href="text11"><sup>11</sup></a> Ibid., 157.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote12">
            <a href="#text12"><sup>12</sup></a> Ibid., 218.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote13">
           <a href="#text13"><sup>13</sup></a> Handwritten notes in the <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> orchestral parts, 1899, OA.448, Österreichische Nationalbibliothek Musiksammlung, Vienna, Austria.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote14">
           <a href="text14"><sup>14</sup></a> Handwritten notes in the <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> seventh Second Violin part, 1899, OA.448, Österreichische Nationalbibliothek Musiksammlung, Vienna, Austria, inside cover.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote15">
            <a href="#text15"><sup>15</sup></a> La Grange, <i>Mahler: the years of challenge (1897-1904)</i>, 216.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="footnote16">
           <a href="#text16"><sup>16</sup></a> Autograph telegram from Mahler to Siegfried Wagner, 1899, HOA Z. 88/1899, Österreichische Nationalbibliothek Theatersammlung, Hofopern Archiv, Vienna, Austria.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="fn17">
           <a href="t17"><sup>17</sup></a> Cosima Wagner, <i>Briefwechsel zwischen Cosima Wagner und Fürst Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg</i> (Gotha, Stuttgart, 1937), 183.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="fn18">
           <a href="#text18"><sup>18</sup></a> Handwritten notes in the <i>Der Bärenhäuter</i> seventh Second Violin part, 1899, OA.448, Österreichische Nationalbibliothek Musiksammlung, Vienna, Austria, inside cover.
        </p>
        <p class="ex1" id="fn19">
            <a href="#text19"><sup>19</sup></a> Bert van der Waal van Dijk, “Gustav Mahler — Siegfried Wagner (1869-1930),” Mahler Foundation Archive, accessed 23 November 2019. <a href="https://mahlerfoundation.info/index.php/personen-2/3580-siegfried-wagner-1869-1930" target="_blank">https://mahlerfoundation.info/index.php/personen-2/3580-siegfried-wagner-1869-1930.</a>
        </p>
        <p class="bottomright">
            <a href="Chapter2_1.html">Next Page --></a>
        </p>
    </body>
</html>
